
10:07
Hello! So my name is Cindy Cheng I'm excited to present this paper, which is a joint work with Shahryar Minhas who unfortunatley couldn't be here today, entitled "Keeping Friends Close, But Enemies Closer: Foreign Aid Responses to Natural Disasters". So, Shahryar and I have been working on this paper for a while, longer than I care to think about, but I think we've been driven to work on this paper so long because we think there are some interesting things about the drivers of foreign aid that haven't been fully investigated before.

In particular, what struck us is that while there is a pretty robust finding in the foreign aid literature that aid is given for strategic purposes, this seems to be at odds  from how aid is commonly discussed in the wider world . So, for most people, you know, non-political scientists, the context in which they hear about aid is when a natural disaster happens.  And the the typical script that people are used to is, okay, you know a terrible natural disaster strikes, suffering abounds and aid pours in from all these  other countries.  Which is what happened in 2003 in bam iran, when a devastating eathquake killed 26-40 percent of the local population, the local infrastractre was just basically flattened, and other countries including, the United States, gave aid.

So you know what’s the big deal right? this is of a peice with the story about natural disasters and aid that we are used to.   What was particularly striking about this was at the time us Iran relations were particularly bad. 

So just the year prior, Bush was busy putting Iran into the Axis of Evil and relations were pretty tense because of Iran's nuclear program. So it wasn't at all a given that the US would give any aid. So its not only that it gave aid, it really had to want to give aid, Bush was obliged to put in a request to Congress to do so actually because the US has had Iran under embargo for decades. And Iran had to agree to allow military planes land in Iran, which basically hadn't happened since the Iranian Revolution --- which not incidentally, occured in part because the US miltiary was seen as having too strong an influence in Iranian domestic politics. 

Further, particularly not only did humanitarian aid go up after the earthquake, but all kinds of other aid did as well. From this graph we can see that humanitarian aid spikes in 2004, the earthquake happened at tthe end of December 2003. Civil society aid increases as well, in a more sustained way, it does decrease but is still higher than what it was before the earthquake, and finally ther is also a slight bump in development aid in the US as well in 2007 and 2008, but ultimately goes back down to its previous, essentially non existent level. 

So what's going on here? Is bam just an anomoly or indicative of a larger pattern of increasing aid to strategic opponents in response to natural disasters? Andd if the latter, how do we square this with the existing literature that foreign aid is given for strategic purposes?  

In order to explain why this might be happening, we first distinguish between aid that is given for short term and long term goals. Distinguishing between the two is important in this case because natural disaster happens, what happens in the short term can be crucial to the recovery effort that there is aid is aimed at  a stop gap to address the immediate effects of the crisis, which is what humanitarian is for . 

We can imagine at least three different explanations for how natural disasters affect the distribution of short term aid.

And in each of them we try to think carefully about how disaster, you know basically a sudden, catastrophic events which threatens the life and livelihoods of all that it affect, can affect the distribution of humanitarian aid.


So first, if we take behavorial economists seriously, then we might think that the incidence of natural disasters might lead to a shift, even if only temporarily, of how strategic allies see each other.  from one that de-emphasizes the conflictual nature of their relationship, the stratetic or military aspect,  toward another that highlights the humanity of the other side. Right, so there's a big literature in behavorial economics that says that how you frame an actor's social context of  can have a big effect on their subsequent behavior --- one study shows that lawyers who would not take on a case because they don't think they would be paid enough for it will then turn around and do the exact same case for free if you call it a charity or pro bono case. And strategic antagonists might be more sensitive to this framing effect precisly because antagonists tend to dehumanize each other more than allies. So donors already see the humanity in their allies, so they're here (hand up high), donors are generally less likely to see the humanity of their strategic antognists, so they put them kind of here (hand low),  but  once a natural disaster happens, the extent to which they humanize their antogonists will be at least as much as allies of that country humanize them. The overall effect is that strategic donors and strategic allies might be likely to send similar amounts of aid to donors as a result.
 
This brings us to:

H1A: Donors who are strategic opponents of the recipient are more likely than strategic allies to be sensitive to the humanizing effect of natural disasters. As such, following natural disasters, donors are likely to send similar amounts of humanitarian aid to strategic allies and strategic opponents.


Or we might think that, as the literature suggests, foreign aid is just always used to further strategic interests. In the case of natural disasters, sure maybe this behavorial economist angle means that natural disaster does push donors to give some aid to their strategic opponents but surely not more aid than to their strategic allies who they have a very real strategic incentive in seeing recover as soon as possible. This brings us to:

H1B: Donors are driven by self-interest and in the event of a natural disaster, donors are likely to send less humanitarian aid to their strategic allies opponents vs their strategic allies.

Finally, we can also imagine one last take, which is that while natural disasters do limit the range of behavoir that states can take, delimiting them to humanitarian ones, and states actually strategically take advantage of this situation to send even more aid to their strategic opponents in order to try and ingratiate themselves with them. Think about the Bam case ——, the US didn’t just give aid to Iran, it had to sign a temporary executive order in order to lift a 20 year embargo in order to give aid.  And their are plenty of examples of states that have been struck by natural disasters being wary of this possibility of manipulation--- When huge flash floods left 10 percent of the population one Venezulena state, vargas, dead, Hugo Chavez agreed to let US troops run helicopter missions to save people but refused their help in rebuilding an important highway, which you know, would have required an extended period of time to do saying he didn't want US troops on the ground in his country. 
 
 This leads us to:

H1C: Donors see natural disasters as a strategic opportunity to improve their relations with strategic opponents and are thus are likely to send more humanitarian aid to strate- gic opponents versus allies


Of course most of the aid that is distributed is not short term, but long term aid. How might natural disasters affect how donors distribute more long term aid? 

And here we try to think about a little more closely about what the aid is supposed to be used for. The goal of civil aid is to empower grass-roots advocacy and improve governance and government accountability; right the idea is that if you don't have good governance, you can spend all the money that you want, and the money will just not get to where its going. But whether it is their intention or not, promoting civil society means that donors are able to exert influence over a recipients domestic politics. And so we might think that donors are more likely to send additional civil society aid to their strategic opponents in the wake of a natural disaster in order to take advantage of this opportunity.


H2: Natural disasters present an opportune window for donors to exert influence over recipients who are their strategic opponents and as such, donors are more likely to send additional civil society aid to their strategic opponents.
 

Meanwhile the focus of development aid is to build the conditions for long-term, sustainable economic growth. Here we simply expect that donor countries are more likely to give this type of aid to countries that they want to see economically develop and prosper, namely, their strategic allies.

H3: Donors are more likely to send greater development aid to their strategic allies irrespective of the number of natural disasters.



We test our hypotheses using a new measure of stratgic interest. It struck us that for all the previous literature that has tried to test the relationship between stratetic interest and foreign aid more generally, is that there are a lot of different measures that get used and the measures that are commonly used don't actually do a great job of measuring the strategic nature of interactions --- that is, the s score of alliances or un voting can capture how similar different dyadic pairs are in different policy realms, but they can't really account for whether country a and b have similar alliance portfolios because of their respective relationships with country c. 

Our latent variable approach allows us to take into account such third order dependencies suggest, that is that “knowing something about the rela- tionship between i and j as well as between i and k may reveal something about the relationship between i and k , even when we do not directly observe it.” We do so by mapping the ways in which different countries might relate to another country, taking into account its relationship wtih all other countries and all countries relationships with each other into a 2 dimensional latent space. We then take the distance between each dyadic pair in that space as our measure of stratetic distance. We do this across three three dimensions of state relations to construct our strategic interest measure: dyadic alliances, UN voting, and joint mem- bership in intergovernmental organizations (IGOs). We focus on these dimensions be- cause each provides a representation of the political and military relations between countries in the international system. Additionally, these measures are commonly employed in the foreign aid literature to measure strategic interest. Dyadic alliances largely capture the strategic and military aspect of country relationships. Meanwhile, joint membership in IGOs reflects the dyadic relationship across many political issue areas, and UN voting is better able to capture this relationship in a centralized forum. FInally we combine the three measures in a principal components analysis to produce or final measure of strategic interest, which we validate against existing measures, and am happy to talk more about in Q & A.


Our measure of natural disasters meanwhile comes from the EMDat dataset, where natural disasters are defined as follows, either 
Ten or more people reported killed
  A hundred or more people reported a ected   Declaration of a state of emergency
  Call for international assistance


We then estimate a linear mixed model where our DV is the log of aid  and our main independent variable of itterest is this interaction between strategic intrest and natural disasters. We include other covariates as well that the literateure has identified  as being important predicors of aid, including colonial status, quality of political institutions, and level of development as measured by both GDP per capita and life expectancy as well as incidence of civil war

From the coefficient plot results suggest support for

Support for H1C
Support for H2
No support for H3

Lets take a look at substantive effects

simulation of effect of strategic distance on log aid depending on whether a country experience no natural disasters, 2 or 4

Donors take advantage of natural disasters to try and ingratiate themselves with strategic opponents with humanitarian aid and civil society aid
Natural disasters do not prompt any more aid than what might be expected from strategic allies


FInally look at this effect over time with lags


