Foreign Aid Hypotheses

Recipient Characteristics
R1: The greater the humanitarian need of a recipient country the more likely it is to recieve foreign aid. Researchers have operationalizd humanitiarn need with a variety of measures, i.e. income levels, food availability, levels of education, measures of weight/height and malnutrition, mortality rates etc. Data available from the World Bank (and already collected).

R2: The more natural resources a recipient country has the more likely there is to be foreign aid. This should be interesting to consider especially in light of Kevin Morrison's (2009) work and how he lumps foreign and and natural resources together in terms of non-tax revenue. This hypotheses stems in particular from observations about China's engagement with Africa within the last decade and a half wherein foreign aid is often coupled with FDI/natural resource extraction. Data for oil and gass available from Michael Ross and the OECD. Might want to investigate data availability for other natural resources - metals and minerals etc.

R3: The more severe a natural disaster the recipient country experiences, the more more likely there is to be foreign aid (We might also want to consider interaction effects with general humanitarian need/income here as well as more developed/prepared countries are less likely to need aid in the event of a natural disaster). Data available from EMDAT (and already collected).

R4: The more domestic conflict there is in a country, the less likely it is to receive foreign aid (Berthelemy 2006). Data available from PRIO (and already collected) and Banks. 

R5/D6?: The better the quality of governance in a recipient country, the more likely it is to receive foreign aid. This may be more of a dyadic relationship; that is the more the donor and recipient dyad score well on the governance indicators, the more likely foreign aid flows. Data available from the WGI.

Sender Characteristics
S1a: The richer the donor country, the more likely it is to give foreign aid. Data available from the World Bank.

S1b: The richer a donor country, the more aid recipients it is likely to give to (This might be better under Network Characteristics). Data available from the World Bank (and already collected).


S2: The greater a donor countries' growth rate, the more likely it is to give foreign aid (not a hypothesis I've seen in the previous foreign aid literature). Data available from the World Bank.


Dyad specific
D1: The more cultural affinity (as measured by language or colonial history), the more likely there is to be foreign aid between dyads. Not sure where this data is, but should be relatively easy to construct.

D2: The more trade linkages between a dyad, the more likely there is to be foreign aid (perhaps as a trade promotion tactic?). Data available from COW (and already collected).

D3: The more political affinity (i.e. the donor and recipient are both democracies or both autocracies, the more likely there is to be foreign aid between dyads. Data can be constructed from a variety of monadic indcators, i.e. Polity IV, Geddes et al, Svolik.

D4: The more religious affinity between dyads, the more likely there is to be foreign aid. Data available from Pew (and already collected).

D5: The more strategically important a recipient country is to a donor country, the more likely it is to recieve aid. UN voting scores and military spending from a donor country in the recipient country are commonly used measures. Specific issues are often also singled out and measured as a dummy variable, including country dummies for Egypt and Isreal as well as a dummy for diplomatic relations with Taiwan that is specific to instances where China is a donor country. We should think about how (and if) we want to incorporate these dummies in this model. Data available from Erik Gartzke.


Network characteristics

N1: The more foreign aid is given in the network in general, the more a country is likely to give foreign aid. That is, if foreign aid is generally employed for strategic reasons, then the political capital one can by with a unit of foreign aid money decreases as total foreign aid given in a country increases.



